## On the agile development approach

> "Initial design focuses on a small subset of the overall functionality.
> This subset is designed, implemented, and then evaluated. Problems with
> the original design are discovered and corrected."

If designing software is to be compared to designing a car or a house,
then implementation of software is not like building a car or a house,
but rather like prototyping a car or testing certain solutions to
organizing space of a house.

Designing software is not like creating a blueprint for a car. Designing
software is like designing an idea for a car. In that process, one combines
all those years of prior experiences in building cars and all the ideas for
improvements and new features, and writes them down, along with reasoning:
which requirements do they address, what do they improve, how do they make
this new car better.

Then one has to prototype and test all of those new features and see whether
they work in practice and what has been missed when they were still only
ideas in one's mind. This phase of prototyping can be compared to the first
iteration (or maybe the first few iterations) of implementing software. The
first implementation is often a prototype which simplifies or misses a number
of factors which are only discovered once moving from the real of ideas to
the realm of coding.

It seems that the challenge posed by software in this aspect - being able to
foresee problems - is in some ways greater than in cases of cars or houses.
It is that because cars, and definitely houses, are much more static when
compared to software: their parts work together to achieve a goal, but their
interactions are effected through the laws of physics rather than derived
from natural language descriptions provided by humans: future users of the
software or someone who is supposed to understand the needs of those future
users.

| Domain | Software | Car | House |
|-|-|-|-|
| Idea   | idea for software | idea for a car | idea for a house |
| Blueprint | the most vague as we constantly try to innovate and outcompete each other | less vague as new models of cars change incrementally | the least vague as houses change very little from one to another |
| Prototype | often only UI mocks; in reality, the first few iterations of the actual implementation | long period of prototyping of all new elements which haven't been tested in previous models | almost none, except for new building materials but those are tested separately from building a house |
| New features | imagined, often miss many practical aspects, often tested with actual users | imagined, extensively tested before putting in a car | tested separately from building a house |
| Features | model and respond to human behaviors and business needs which can at best be described in natural language | serve humans and might have dynamic structure but are implemented by physical elements | mostly static structure, built with physical elements |
| Interactions of elements | dynamic, arbitrary, often evolving | somewhat dynamic, governed by laws of physics, rarely evolving | mostly static, governed by laws of physics, evolving only superficially (interior design, adjustments which do not impact load-bearing structure) |
| Examples | tax software | | | 

I have a very limited undertanding of how cars or houses are designed. The point here,
however, is to explain how software engineers imagine those domains, and that I believe
I can do quite well. Moreover, the main argument here is that both of those domains,
car and house design, allocate long periods of time to prototyping, testing, evalution,
iterative improvements. Software is often tested with its actual users, time-to-market
is a crucial factor in achieving success in the market, and engineers do not have the
time necessary to carefully design, prototype, evaluate and improve a feature which is
to be develired to customers.
