## Examples: Java and Unix I/O

Java IO API is compared to the few base Linux API calls described in an earlier
section: `open`, `read`, `write`, `lseek`, `close`. There are a few simplifications
here which make this example seem more compelling than it might actually be.

Firstly, Java's API is criticized for exposing the choice of buffered IO in an awkward
or overly complicated manner. It is important to note that this particular Linux API
offers no user-side buffering. In fact, it is the ANSI C `fopen`, `fclose` etc. API
which offers user-side buffering. This ANSI C API is built on top of the above POSIX
API.

Secondly, this interface is not as simple as the book might suggest. For example, a quick
look at the [`open (2)` manual page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/open.2.html)
tells us that `open` takes a `flags` argument which is a boolean sum of 17 different
flags. In addition, `open` and its variations (like `openat` or `creat`) have around 40
different failure modes which they report through the `errno` variable. Finally, the
`open (2)` manual page contains multiple sections which describe interactions between
`open` and its variations and other OS APIs and mechanisms.


> Implementations of the Unix I/O interface have evolved radically over the years, but
> the five basic kernel calls have not changed.

Here, one could argue that an important reason for this API remaining unchaged over
the years is that it is a part of multiple standards: System V, POSIX, BSD, glibc.
There is a lot to be said about how generic and fitting this API is for the purpose
of manipulating files but it nevertheless must conform with those standards and can
only change when standards change.


## Depth

The depth dimension, as described in this chapter, points to a deeper underlying
idea: the delineation of concepts in the mental model of the problem domain. Software
appears first in the mind of the programmer. Of course, the process can be iterative,
that is, writing code can inform changes to the mental model which are then applied
back to the code. But this doesn't change the fact that software exists first in the
mind of the programmer.

It exists there in the form of entities, their behaviors and relationships between
them. That mental model can be expressed in a natural language as well as in a
programming language. Both expressions can be analyzed and the degree to which they
match the problem domain can be established, and maybe evaluated. The evolution of
software reflects the evolution of understanding of the problem domain and of the
optimal way to map it to the said concepts, behaviors and relations.

The better the match, the more concise the set of concepts, and the less unnecessary
code. The depth dimension is correlated with the quality of this match: good match
between model and reality implies deep classes. Deep classes not necessarily imply
a good match, but are likely correlated with it.

Domain-Driven Design points in that direction: correct UBIQUITOUS LANGUAGE leads to
a correct split into a hierarchy of modules, submodules, classes, etc.