## Why exceptions add complexity

Looking at a function, I want as few possible threads of control as possible. That is,
tracing what a function does should require as few potential forks in control flow as
possible. Ideally, there is only one way to step through the function, from start to
finish.

Exceptions add to possible sequences of steps when tracing the flow of execution of
a function. But so does referencing non-local state modified elsewhere.

Non-local state creates a dependency between the writer and the reader. If both (or
multiple) sides can write and read, then they all depend on each other.

## Too many exceptions

> Some might argue that this approach empowers callers, since it allows each caller
> to handle the exception in a different way. However, if you are having trouble
> figuring out what to do for the particular situation, there's a good change that
> the caller won't know what to do either.

> The exceptions thrown by a class are part of its interface; class with lots of
> exceptions have complex interfaces, and they are shallower than classes with fewer
> exceptions.

> Throwing exceptions is easy, handling them is hard.

## Example: Java substring method

Substring takes two arguments, the indices of the start and the end of a substring.
Both indices might be out of bounds of the original string which could be an error.
We get anxious about the possibility of an error and decide to detect it and throw
an exception to make that error clear and visible.

However, in general this is only a *possibility* of an error, not a *guarantee* of
an error. If the `substring()` method is redefined as postulated in the example,
to fix indices so that they make sense in the most reasonable way, we assume that
the caller is sloppy, not paying attention or not precise. And we want to force
everyone to be precise, *for their own good*.

We should not make this assumption: precise or not, the caller knows best what they
need. If the default behavior is to produce a substring in the most reasonable way,
then it handles majority of situations where the caller simply doesn't care. And
when then do, they can check their indices against the length of the string and
decide of them being out-of-bounds is actually an error, and act accordingly if it
is.

This is similar to redefining the `unset` API of Tcl in one of the previous
examples. It *could* be an error to attempt to remove a non-existing variable
but the caller can check for its existence. In that case, which likely has a
lower probability of occurrence, the extra code (which checks whether the
variable exists) has only to be written when the caller *wants* to check for
that possibility and *considers it to be an error*. In all other cases, when
removing a non-existing variable is not an error, the resulting code is shorter.

## Just crash?

> Today's systems have so much memory that memory almost never runs out; it it
> does, it usually indicates a bug in the application. Thus, it rarely makes sense
> to try to handle out-of-memory errors; this creates too much complexity for too
> little benefit.

> Aborting with an error message is also appropriate if an application encounters
> an internal error such as an inconsistent data structure. Conditions like this
> probably indicate bugs in the program.


But here is when crashing is not a good idea.

> The recovery mechanisms will add considerable complexity to the program, but
> recovering lost data is an essential part of the value the system provides to
> its users.


## Taking it too far

> (...); in the rare situations where a caller cares about the special cases detected
> by the exceptions, there are other ways for it to get this information.

As described above, with the `unset` and `substring()` examples: caller can check
for inputs inconsistent with the program state if they don't want our method to
silently bring back consistency to the program.

> With exceptions, as with many other areas is software design, you must determine
> what is important and what is not important.


But how? This clearly points to the incompleteness of the set of rules described
(so far?) in this book. If the final remark is that someone "must determine what
is important", then it sends the reader to rules outside of what is covered in
the book. That something is the model of the problem domain, which is what I
mentioned in my earlier notes. Some aspects of it, for some specific domains,
are covered in "Domain-Driven Design".


## Conclusion

> The best way to [reduce the number of places where exception must be handled]
> is by redefining semantics to eliminate error conditions. For exception that
> can't be defined away, you should look for opportunities to mask them at a
> low level, so their impact is limited, or aggregate several special-case
> handlers into a single more generic handler. Together, these techniques can
> have a significant impact on overall system complexity.
