## Design it twice

> Designing software is hard, so it's unlikely that your first thoughts about how to
> structure a module or system will produce the best design.

Why is it hard? Because only over time we can uncover the true nature of entities,
their behaviors and relationships between them which accurately model the problem
domain.

When designing and implementing a software system, our first, intuitive understanding
of the problem domain will necessarily be approximate. This is why business which use
software to serve their customer also hire people directly responsible for learning
about those customers, their needs and translating those learnings into software
requirements, which are passed on to the development team. And even then, it is often
necessary to experiment with software features resulting from those requirements.
This is why A/B testing is such an important tool: program managers and development
teams can come up with multiple alternative feature designs which meet requirements
as they are stated. Only by exposing those alternatives to independent groups of
customers, in a controlled experiment can give the final answer: what do our customers
really want?

Given the above, it should come as no surprise that modeling the problem domain in
software is a hard problem. And that is even before we consider how needs of customers
can change over time, or how competitors can design an even better feature which
addresses any given customer need, and through that force us to evolve our own
software.

Problem domains which involve humans, especially in retail business, cannot be separated
from the above challenges. But more technical domains are not free from them, as well.
In robotics, the growth in processing capabilities or development of new or improved
sensing capabilities will open up new possibilities: what kind and how many input
streams can be combined as inputs to the decision-making algorithm.


> You'll end up with a much better result if you consider multiple options for each
> major design decision: design it twice.

This is related directly to a standard industry practice of including at least two
design approaches when discussing a new module, feature, capability, etc. One is
often called the "recommended design" while there should be one or more "alternative
designs" which explain approaches sub-optimal in some sense:

* too costly or too complex for the alloted financial or time budget, but with
  potential value for future iterations
* more intuitive on the surface, but containing some crucial weakness which the team
  needs to be aware of - or which is expected to be brought up during the design
  review

> Suppose you are designing the class that will manage the test of a file for a GUI
> text editor. The first step is to define the interface that the class will present
> to the rest of the editor; rather than picking the first idea that comes to mind,
> consider several possibilities.

Actually, the first step is to define the problem domain: what are the entities,
their behaviors and their relationships when it comes to editing text - and not
necessarily editing text _with a computer!_ What kind of actions does the user
want to take? What kind of elements does the user interact with and manipulate?
How can they be changed? How do they relate to each other?


> Even if you are certain that there is only one reasonable approach, consider a
> second design anyway, no matter how bad you think it will be. It will be instructive
> to think about the weaknesses of that design and contrast them with the features of
> other designs.

Exactly!


> In the text example, the character-oriented approach is likely to be significantly
> slower than the others, because it requires a separate call into the text module
> for each character.

Shouldn't that be determined by profiling? At this high-level of generality it
sounds contradictory to this adage from "The Art of Computer Programming" by Donald Knuth:

"The real problem is that programmers have spent far too much time worrying about
efficiency in the wrong places and at the wrong times; premature optimization is
the root of all evil (or at least most of it) in programming."


> In order to eliminate the additional text manipulations, the text interface needs
> to match more closely the operations happening in higher level software.

Why not take it a step further and say that software interface needs to match
operations undertaken by the user?


> It's also useful to explore multiple designs at higher levels in the system,
> such as when choosing features for a user interface (...)

And here it is!


> I have noticed that the design-it-twice principle is sometimes hard for really
> smart people to embrace. When they are growing up, smart people discover that their
> first quick idea about any problem is sufficient for a good grade; there is no need
> to consider a second or third possibility. This tends to result in bad work habits.

Our minds model a novel problem with mental impressions, images, vague notions.
We then consider their behaviors and relationships and we feel that we have something
going - except almost no one can capture details of any of those elements without
experiencing them first-hand.

This is why it is not sufficient to read textbooks about algorithms - at least
anything minimally complex. One needs to implement such an algorithm or track its
progress with toy input, a pen and a piece of paper. Our minds are analog and simply
cannot comprehend as easily notions which are discrete in nature, esp. when the
number of details (states, possible combinations or alternatives, paths) crosses
some threshold. Still, it is a skills which can be trained - but one should always
stay humble and assume that they missed a detail or two, some of which might turn
out crucial to the correct design or solution.

> Unfortunately, I often see smart people who insist on implementing the first idea
> that comes to mind, and this causes them to underperform their true potential (it
> also makes them frustrating to work with).

That's a nice quote!


> The design-it-twice approach not only improves your designs, but it also improves your
> design skills. The process of devising and comparing multiple approaches will teach you
> about the factors that make designs better or worse. Over time, this will make it easier
> for you to rule out bad designs and hone in on really great ones.

I believe that this was already mentioned in the introduction: to become good at software
design, one needs to practice that skills and learn from mistakes. This book gives a number
of sound directional instructions and captures important aspects of evaluating design in
a helpful way - at least when it comes to _code design_ - as opposed to
_architectural design_. But, to me, it doesn't seem to probe this space deep enough -
especially when it comes to modelling the problem domain.