# Techno Feudalism. What killed Capitalism

Yanis Varoufakis


## Hesiod's Lament

> In our days, everything seems pregnant with its contrary: Machinery, gifted
> with the wonderful power of shortening and fructifying human labour, we
> behold starving and overworking it; The newfangled sources of wealth, by some
> strange weird spell, are turned into sources of want; The victories of art
> seem bought by the loss of character." (p. 12)

An individual craftsman held power over his customers: he could refuse to
manufacture or sell goods to a person. Guilds held power over people: they
could admit or refuse to admit someone to their guild, teach them the craft,
refuse to cooperate. So power was located with individuals doing the work.

With the advent of machines, some of the operations requiring trained skills
were moved into the machine, so the pool of available workers grew: the amount
of talent and training required from a person went down, so more individuals
could join the profession (less talent required) and they could be trained
faster (less training time). This shifted the power from workers to the
owners of means of production (machines): there were now more potential
workers (more supply) and fewer owners of machines (more concentrated demand).
That also strengthened factory owners relative to aristocrats, as the
factory owners now held power over workers (could influence their workers
to act against aristocrats) and became more wealthy relative to the previous
ruling class.

An interesting aspect here is why factories and machines could not be taken
away from factory owners by the working class. Even though the previous ruling
class would welcome the relative fall in power of the factory owners, letting
workers own the machines would have two negative consequences: firstly, the
workers would now be empowered so the power would not be shifted back to
the ruling class. Secondly, it would encourage workers to rebel against the
rules, too.

Similarly, establishing cloud-based services like Amazon shifts the power
from factory owners and towards owners of these platforms: and the platform
owners have a stronger position between these two.


## Capitalism's Metamorphoses

> After all, what gives any currency value but the economy that stands
> behind it? (p. 40)


> Naturally, there had to be limits to how many dollars one could get
> for one's "funny money" - Greek drachmas, Italian lire, etc. These limits
> were known as capital controls: restrictions in the movement of money from
> one currency to another. (p. 40)


## Cloud capital

> Because they had iron weapons that the Mycenaeans lacked, they took over
> the good land. Once they had it, they acquired power over those who had
> lost it. And until fairly recently, it was that precise combination - of
> land and sophisticated weaponry - that decided who did what to whom; who
> had power, and who had to obey. This was feudalism.

> Before capitalism, capital was easy to define. It took the form of
> _material goods_ that were produced specifically for the purpose of
> _producing other goods._ A steel sword, in this sense, was not capital
> - since it could produce nothing, except a severed head or a pierced
> torso. But a steel plough or a fishing rod were typical capital goods
> or, to rephrase the definition, _produced means of production_.

> Sure enough, one of capital's natures is tangible, physical and measurably
> productivity-enhancing. But its second nature is an ineffable power to
> command others - a potent but fragile power (...).

> The transition from feudalism to capitalism was, in essence, a shift of
> the power to command from landowners to owners of capital goods. For that
> to happen, peasants had first to lose autonomous access to common lands.
> That's why the enclosures in Britain were essential for capitalism's birth:
> they denied British labour the opportunities Peel's workers discovered in
> Western Australia [free land]. (...)
>
> By restricting access to land, the enclosures helped capital to transcend
> its original productivity-enhancing role and to frow exponentially in
> commanding power. (...) With the magnification of capital's command power
> over labour, capital's owners amassed great wealth. As their wealth
> accumulated, their social power proliferated. They graduated from being
> employers to agenda setters wherever big decisions were being made. Soon,
> capitalists could boss everyone around, including the landed gentry - even
> the royals.

> As with the original Enclosures, some form of fence would be necessary to
> keep the masses out of such an important resource. In the eighteenth
> century, it was land that the many were denied access to. In the twenty-first
> century, it is access to our own identity. _(p. 75)_

> No, the truly historic disruption was to automate capital's power to
> command people _outside_ the factory, the shop or the office - to turn all
> of us, cloud proles and everyone else, into cloud serfs in the direct
> (unremunerated) service of cloud capital, unmediated by any market. _(p. 93)_

The power of the market mechanism lies in its ability to introduce
competition between participants of the market, both on the supply and
demand sides. Without a market, supply and demand actors have limited
choice with whom to engage: maybe there is only one local producer of
a given good or only one buyer of a given product. In that case, the
counterparts of that single actor have to all engage with that single
entity and are forced to take its/their terms.

Market introduces the ability to choose a different counterpart and
forces those counterparts to compete against each other.

> Meanwhile, conventional capitalist manufacturers increasingly have no
> option but to sell their goods at the discretion of the cloudalists,
> paying them a fee for the privilege, developing a relationship with
> them no different to that of vassals vis-a-vis their feudal overlords.
> _(p. 93)_