# Code Health Guardian

Artie Shevchenko




## Chapter 3: Design by Contract

Tests are the main mechanism to enforce contracts.


## Chapter 5: Independence Quest

> Clarity in tests is even more important than in production code. _(p. 82)_



## Chapter 6: Semi-Functional Programming

> "Thinking of code as a series of (nested) transformations can be a liberating
> approach to programming. It takes a while to get used to, but once you develop
> the habit you'll find your code becomes cleaner, your functions shorter, and
> your designs flatter." _(p. 103)_


## Chapter 7: Naming: The Obscurity Champion

> Guess what? The AWS SQS message has to different fields: `attributes` and
> `messageAttributes`. Some of its attributes reside in `message.messageAttributes`
> and some in `message.attributes`. From our perspective, it was even worse than
> `message.attributes0` and `message.attributes1`. When you see ``message.attributes`,
> how on earth would you know there is another `message.messageAttributes` field
> that you should ask for to be populated in AWS response?

Our code tells a story. For the reader, that story must have only one interpretation.


## Chapter 8: Trade-Off Analysis and Design Docs

The whole chapter is worth reading. It helps paint a picture of how the transfer
of knowledge between team members is at the center of team efficiency.


## Chapter 10: Code Reviews

> (...) there is a fundamental problem there - as the author, you know what you
> meant by your comments, design, naming choice, etc. With that context, it's hard
> to reason about whether what you actually wrote conveys that meaning. Such
> [curse of knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_knowledge) makes a
> pair of fresh eyes indispensable.


> (...) five dynamics consistently differentiated top-performing teams from those
> at the bottom:
>
>   1. Psychological safety
>   2. Dependability
>   3. Structure and clarity
>   4. Meaning
>   5. Impact _(p. 163)_

> There are multiple mechanisms for influencing the level of psychological safety
> within a team, but code reviews stand out. (...) Thus, freely discussing our
> mistakes, modling being vulnerable, and showing genuine care for our colleagues
> during the review process is an unprecedented opportunity to gauge the level
> of psychological safety in the team. Don't ever underestimate the importance
> of code reviews! They play a crucial role in shaping your team's trust climate.
> _(p. 165)_


Goals of code reviews:

> * Ensure code health (ensure there i no code health regression)
> * Provide feedback and share knowledge
> * Building trust
> * Deliver the change fast
> _(p. 165)_


> As long as PR improves the overalll health of your codebase it's okay to
> approve and merge it. _(p. 171)_